So I'm going to tell you today about a way of looking at the world that 
I think is substantially different from the way that most people look at the world and 
the way I want to tell you about looking at the world today is I think more inclusive than a standard sort of 
Materialist view of the Standard Scientific view [of] the [world] of course is that it's made up of familiar 
Objects, and if the world is in essence a material place, but there's some very 
Potent limitations of [that] Viewpoint despite the fact that it's given us tremendous power 
And the limitations are essentially as follows 
the 
essential 
Materialist view 
Can't tell us anything about consciousness. Which is probably the primary fact of experience 
Neuroscientists in recent years mostly in the last decade of being trying to crack the [problem] of consciousness 
And they have absolutely made no progress 
They've tried to associate 
consciousness with Neuronal activity 
But that seems to be an incomplete answer because there's many forms of neuronal activity in the brain [that] aren't accompanied by consciousness at all 
Not only do neuroscientists understand virtually nothing about consciousness 
They can't even really figure out what its function is they can't understand why our? 
Brains would go to so much effort to make us aware of things 
When it isn't clear at all that awareness is necessary for life 
Especially given that there are many life [forms] on the [planet] that don't seem to be aware at all 
The Standard Materialist view is also insufficient many other ways. It's insufficient philosophically. I think as you probably all know because a 
Conception that portrays the world is made up of objects is in some really fundamental way dead 
[alright]. It doesn't seem to have a place [in] it for human beings or replacing it for meaning or a mode whereby you might be 
Able to conceptualize the real existence of something like an emotion or a dream or a motivation all phenomena 
which are just as mysterious to neuroscientists and to scientists in General as 
consciousness 
Now the problem with this seems to be 
bim-bam-boum, ça fait -pschhht!- et ça fait "vroum"
mostly 
Oriental if you have to ask people what they know more than anything else. They know number one that they're conscious 
They know number two that their internal experience of life is 
Composed of emotions and motivational states which although not rational and essential structure are so real and relevant 
That virtually everything that people do is predicated on them so our current Viewpoint 
Despite its ability to give us tremendous technological power seems to eradicate from formal consideration 
many many essential experiences that are vital to life in fact even perhaps primary [nope] 
I'm going to suggest to you today that there's an alternative [Viewpoint], and I think also it's one that 
Although you may be hearing about it. Formally for the first time is also something that you know 
unbelievably deeply how 
thousands of Years ago plato 
proposed that all 
Knowledge was remembering of course 
We don't believe that today because we [believe] we gather knowledge as a consequence of contact with the world 
But you'll see today that the knowledge that I'm going to share with you will strike a deep chord of remembering and it's because everything 
That you've done throughout your life is in one way or another 
Predicated on what I'm going to tell you [today] 
I'm going to demonstrate this in a peculiar way 
[I] think because I'm going to start by telling you a story and the reason I'm going to do that is because 
Models of the world that include phenomena like consciousness and emotions and motivations and actions and interactions are 
Generally portrayed 
formally in 
stories and not in scientific theories and it does turn out to be that stories themselves have an 
identifiable structure even a grammar that makes them comprehensible 
Furthermore it turns out that even the simplest stories, especially if they're elegantly constructed have an unbelievably profound 
Underlying meaning and you can frequently see this most particularly in children's stories 
So I 
Remember, I showed my son 
When he was four years old the disney movie pinocchio which on the surface [of] it is a very strange tale, right? 
It's a wooden puppet who wants to become real so he has to rescue his father 
in the belly of a whale a 
Structure that could by no means be considered rational 
That is in fact so surprising and unexpected that it's remarkable to imagine that grown men and women 
including children can sit in a movie theater and watch a story like [that] unfold without ever thinking for a 
Second that. It's absolutely peculiar that they can be taken in by such [a] tale and regard it experientially as real 
Pinocchio is a deep deep story 
It has echoes that go back three or four thousand years to the earliest stories that we know and it's so rich with information 
That a child can watch it over and over and over and over I think my son wants pinocchio Thirty times 
Why well it's either because a child can't tell the [difference] between fantasy and reality 
Or it's because there's something to those stories. That's much more potent than we actually consciously understand. It's kind of interesting too 
you know if you go to a 
Sort of video rental 
Establishment you'll find that in the top [ten] highest grossing movies of all time are for disney movies that are animated Fairy tales 
Essentially retelling of mythological stories. They strike a deep chord 
Why? 
[all] Shakespeare was of course a great literary figure said it perhaps better than anyone 
[else] has which is not surprising because he said many things better than anyone else has he said all the world's a stage 
And all the men and women merely players they have their exits and their entrances and one [man] in his time plays many parts 
And so following from that you can imagine that a story is no more about the props 
in the world 
Than a play that you go see is about the props on the stage a drama is about the manner in which people 
Actually exist the emotions that they feel the motivational states they encounter the problems 
They have to solve when they interact with each other and the plays the thing from that particular 
Perspective in which we can capture those aspects of our experience that are not only real, but essentially human 
I'm going to tell you a little story to begin this off with it's a kids story written for children 
[of] about four years of age, but it's very very elegant I tried to cut it down for this talk 
But I found I couldn't because it was so well edited that 
every single piece of it had to fit in to make the story complete and I'm going to show you first the 
Structure of the story now. This is a very useful 
Diagram in many ways, it's very simple basically it says this 
Whenever you're doing anything 
You inhabit a bounded world now. You know like for example. You're sitting here in this lecture 
There's things you are paying attention to and things you're not if I took most of you out [of] this room right now and asked 
you 
Definitively. What color the rug was you wouldn't know or what color your chair was for example 
Or what the person next to you was wearing and blessed that person happens to be your husband or your wife 
You wouldn't remember any of those things and the reason for that is when you're in a situation like this 
and you're attending to a speaker most of the 
Occurrences that are unfolding around you are irrelevant. You don't store them. You only focus on certain things 
well, how do you decide what to focus on given that there's virtually unlimited number of things to pay attention to 
well 
You have to conceive of yourself as being somewhere always and you have to conceive of yourself as going somewhere 
So you could say in in a real sense the world you inhabit is a journey 
it's a journey from point a to point b a journey from what is to what should be a 
Journey from the place you are which is insufficient in some important Manner 
to a place that in some important matter is going to be better a 
Standard story has exactly that structure child comes home, and you say well, what happened to you today on the way to school? 
Setting up the little narrative structure in the childhood unfold the sequence of events [that] he encountered if the story's more 
interesting than [just] a recount of 
Exactly what happened [to] it usually involves the encounter with something 
Unexpected on the way to point B. And a description of the manner in which that encounter with the unexpected was resolved 
Typical story now, why would you want to know that why would you want [to] listen to it? Well? 
It's because on your journey from Point a to point B 
All Sorts of unexpected things always happen 
And if someone else has encountered something unexpected and conjured up a [decent] solution to it it could well be worth your time to listen 
well 
Maybe there's a pattern to encountering unexpected things 
Maybe there's a proper way to encounter the unexpected 
Maybe it's the case that in our collective wisdom as human beings. We've gathered up 
Representations of ways to encounter the unexpected that we put forth in our stories 
How should you face what you don't understand? 
Well now I'm going to tell you this story 
It's written for four-Year-old kids 
But I want you to take a look at it for a moment from a different perspective and see if you can imagine 
Exactly what it is that it's say? 
There's no such thing as a dragon 
Well, we all know that right [a] dragon is a fictitious creature 
reptilian 
Terrible lives forever 
breathes fire 
Hoards gold 
Strange combination of attributes why would something terrible and ancient hold a treasure? 
[Billie] Bixby was rather surprised when he woke up one [morning], and found a dragon in his room 
It was a small dragon about the size of a kitten 
The Dragon wagged its tail happily when Billy patted its head 
It's interesting you know in Chinese mythology 
Dragon is a positive figure in 
European Mythology the Dragon is something to face in combat and 
Destroy or something to face in combat and build something out of the pieces left over from the dragon 
Billy went downstairs to tell his mother 
It's no such thing as a dragon said Billy's mother and she said it like she meant it 
Remember once my daughter had a nightmare 
[she's] about [four] 
this was at the time when she first started to notice graffiti and litter and 
Both graffiti and leonard bothered her she couldn't understand the motivations behind the graffiti artist 
And she didn't like the fact that there was litter 
Cluttering up the world's order and the reason she got sensitive to that as a child was because children are 
Really really dependent on order right? 
I mean and the reason for that is that their realm of competence is rather restricted 
So they'd like to see things [Mac] messed up, so little kids for example 
They're not happy with you [if] you play a game with them and then mess around with the rules of the game 
They don't like that at all they think that that's immoral activity to shake up the structure of the game 
Well anyways well she was pondering all this she came into our bedroom one night and said Dad 
I had a nightmare now 
We all know right nightmares aren't real just like dragons dreams aren't real 
Of course which raises the question of why in the world you'd bother having them six or seven hours a night every? 
Single day of [your] life, and why they're a recognized feature of animal behavior all the way down to the amphibian level 
She said I dreamt that there was a clear flowing stream, but in the stream there was all sorts of garbage 
And it scared me and bothered me so much. I woke up so I told her look 
Close your eyes and imagine the stream. It's full of garbage. What should you do about it? 
She said well, I should take the garbage out of the stream. I said [alright], so 
Picture the stream picture yourself cleaning the garbage out of it. [she] 
[calmed] down and went back to sleep why well because dreams concentrate on threat 
We know that they present threats to you threats you haven't been able to deal [with] well 
There's a part of your brain [that] tracks threats 
And it's not really all [that] smart in some ways all it does is say look here's a problem 
And it's waiting for the rest of your brain [to] conjure up some solution that problem 
and if it doesn't conjure up a solution 
Then it just presents the problem over and over and over and over and [over] so people who have post-traumatic stress disorder for example 
Who've been really upset by their contact with something unexpected dream about the same tragedy 
forever until they solve it and they solve it by 
Facing it and living it over and over 
Voluntarily so you might think right off the bat from listening to that little story that 
Suggesting to your four-Year-old daughter who's just had a nightmare that her fears aren't real and that the dream representation of them isn't real 
Because it's not tangible like a table might not really be the best approach to the problem. So you see 
Billy 
He's pretty much got it right right off the bat right the dragon wagged his tail happily when Billy patted its head 
Billy went downstairs to tell his mother. There's no such thing [as] a dragon said Billy's mother and she said it like she meant it 
So there's a dragon in this house now the next thing 
[he] might wonder is how often have you actually gone into a house where there's a dragon my guess is if you don't take this 
Particularly specifically and allow yourself to use your imagination and to think metaphorically for a moment 
you've all 
Encountered dozens of houses that were filled right to the rafters with various dragons all of which were being 
studiously ignored by the people who inhabited the house 
Billy went back to his room and began to dress the dragon came close to Billy in a friendly manner and wagged its tail 
But billy didn't pat it if there's no such thing as something. It's silly to pat it on the head 
Billy washed his face and hands and went down to breakfast the dragon went along it was bigger. Now almost the size of a dog 
Billy sat down at the table 
The Dragon sat down on the table this sort of thing was not usually permitted 
But there wasn't much Billy's mother could do about it 
She'd already said there was no such [thing] as a dragon 
And if there's no such thing you can't tell it to get down off the table 
sometimes I sit with friends of mine who [have] very young children to eat say and 
The children two or three years old don't sit at the table 
They sit on the table or they run around the table [or] they run around the table and pull things off the table 
Or they run around the house and pull things off all the shelves in the house and keep their 
Parents so busy chasing them around that they have no time whatsoever to interact as adults. Well you have to wonder under those circumstances 
Whether you're dealing with a child or a dragon so to speak and you [also] might wonder whether or not the dragon is 
Large and unruly precisely because the parents are completely unwilling to admit that it actually exists 
mother made some pancakes for Billy 
[but] the dragon ate them all mother made some more 
But the dragon ate those too mother kept making pancakes until she ran out of batter 
Billy only got one of them, but he [said] that's all he really wanted anyway one time 
an acquaintance of ours in Boston 
Brought their son over to be babysat at our house and his nanny had just been in a car [accident] 
so he was being shunted from house to house while his parents went off to work and 
He didn't have very good reputation. This kid. He's about 4 and 
He came over to our house and with his mother in the morning, and she dropped him off and she said 
Well he probably won't eat all day, but that's all right 
And I thought no 
He's 4 if he doesn't eat all day ah that's not 
Alright right because kids if they don't eat. They're basically horrible, right they don't sleep, but they don't eat 
They're horrible, so it isn't alright that he doesn't eat 
So then you think well 
Maybe there's some sort of dragon associated with this child that happens to be interfering 
perhaps with his ability to eat 
so I came back at noon my wife had taken care of the children that day and I walked in the house and 
The other four or five kids that we had in the house were off playing and this little kid was 
Standing in the corner like really isolated and looking you know 
Upset fundamentally, so I went over and I poked him a bunch because generally if you poke a kid a little bit 
You know well, they'll go like this you know [they] sort of back off, but Sooner or later 
You can crack them and they'll smile, and then they'll play not this kid boy. There's no bloody way 
He's going to play with me and that was [act] like he'd already learned that 
Adults should either be ignored or that they were trouble and he wasn't going to let any adult into his little world 
So there was absolutely a dragon associated with that little boy, and it [was] eating all his pancakes 
Billy went upstairs to brush his teeth 
[mothers] started clearing the table the dragon who was quite as big as mother by this time made himself 
Comfortable in the hall rug and went to sleep 
I really like this one 
By the time Billy came back downstairs the Dragon had grown so much he filled the hall 
Billy had to go around by way of the living room to get to where his mother was I? 
Didn't know dragons grew so fast said billy. There's no such thing [as] a dragon said mother firmly 
Cleaning the downstairs took mother all morning 
What with the dragon in the way and having to climb in and out of windows to get from room to room? So you know? 
You think back in your own experience when you've gone to a house where there's a dragon 
Hiding underneath the living room rug, and nobody's saying anything about it, and then you think how long does it take to get something 
Absolutely simple done in a house that's absolutely jammed to the rafters with unfinished business 
forever right 
organizing people in a household like that to even do something as simple as go out for breakfast in the morning [or] even [perhaps] to 
Make a meal is virtually impossible 
[why]? 
Well because there's something going on in the household that [has] been studiously ignored for a very long time 
And has grown so large as a consequence that it occupies the whole domain 
By noon the Dragon filled the house 
Its head hung out the front door its tail hung out the back door and there wasn't a room in the house 
That didn't have some part of the dragon in it 
When the dragon awoke from his nap he was hungry 
The bakery truck went by the smell of Fresh bread was more than the [dragon] could resist 
He ran down the street after the bakery truck the house went along of course like the shell on a snail 
the Mailman was just coming up the path with some mail for the bixby's when their house rushed past him and 
Headed down the street. He chased the bixby's house for a few blocks, but he but he couldn't catch it 
When Mr.. Bixby came home for lunch the first thing he noticed was that his house was gone 
Luckily one of the neighbors was able to tell them which way it went you know 
That sort of thing happens to people not infrequently - right. Hey 
they're not really looking around much at what's going on and they come home from work one day and 
their house is gone, and what does [that] mean well, maybe their 
Children have become completely alienated from them or maybe their wife has decided suddenly, but of course not so suddenly to leave 
Why? 
Well according to this story. It's because something ignored was growing in the house 
Mr.. Bixby got in his car and went looking [for] the house 
He studied all the houses as he drove along finally he saw one that looked familiar Millie and Mrs. 
Bixby were waving from an upStairs window 
You know in the 1890s in India when a house was being built the local 
Priest Equivalent to the Priest would come by to set the foundation stone and when he set the foundation stone 
he'd take a big spike and 
drove it into the ground and the reason he drove it into the ground at the 
Place where the foundation was going to be laid was to keep the great dragon that is underneath the Earth firmly pinned down 
By its head, so it couldn't move and shake the house to bits. What does that mean? Well it means the same [thing] 
That's meant in the new testament 
[when] you're told not to build your house on a foundation of sound right doesn't matter how good the house is or how? 
[well-constructed] [it] is or how rich it is if the 
Foundation is made out of sand or if it rests on top of the [dragon] 
There's nothing in that household that's ever going to be accomplished 
That's positive and the wealth the display that the house might consist of is nothing, but a sham 
Mr.. Bixby climbed over the Dragon's head onto the porch Roof and through the upStairs window 
How did this happen Mr.. Bixby asked it was the Dragon said Billy? 
there's no such thing mother started to say there is a dragon billy insisted a very big Dragon and 
Billy patted the Dragon on the head 
The Dragon wagged its tail happily then even faster than it had grown the dragon started getting smaller 
Soon it was kitten sized again 
How do wine dragons this size said mother? 
Why did it have to grow so [big]? I'm not sure said Billy, but I think it just wanted to be noticed [so] 
The first thing you might think [about] is just what happens if you don't pay a bill like really don't pay it, right? 
I mean when it first comes in it's only the size of a kitten 
But if you leave it alone for two or three years [it] pretty much grows into a full-fledged dragon. Why? 
Well because things that you ignore have a life of their own complex life like a bill bills attached to a whole 
Industrial complex, right 
One of whose major functions is to make sure that you pay the bill and if you don't pay the bill then you 
Immediately find out what it's connected to 
it's connected to something immense and very troublesome, and if you allow the full force of that thing to manifest itself, it's not pretty [so] 
[one] lesson from this story is that if Something's? 
Nagging at you 
Just a bit 
It's probably better to deal with it [before] it turns into a full-fledged dragon, and then you might think [well] 
What if it's already a full-fledged dragon right? I mean then what's your options? 
There's nothing left, but to run away 
And so then I can tell you what we know from fifty years of studying the outcome of clinical pSychological interventions 
So let's take an extreme case right let's say something truly terrible has happened to you and as a consequence of that you're in shock 
[post] [traumatic] shock which is a condition that's sufficiently 
Serious to damage your brain over time. It's not only a pSychological disorder 
It's a physical disorder [if] you really stress your cortisol levels shoot up 
And if your cortisol level shoot up that cortisol and high doses is a neurotoxin starts to damage your brain 
So let's take a very extreme [case] and imagine that you've been 
Violently sexually assaulted and as a consequence of [that] you're in post-traumatic shock, how do you get cured? 
So that means you can't really go outside 
you certainly can't encounter anything that's associated with the event your sense of 
Integrity and personal safety has been completely destroyed is there any way you can get back on [your] feet? 
And all there's a woman named phowa in New York 
I think one of the world's top clinical psYchologists 
and she's been dealing with women who have post-traumatic stress disorder for decades and she's found a 
treatment 
that works 
And the treatment is this she has the women relived the event in as much detail [as] possible 
Over and over in their imagination with the accompanying emotion and she's found because she's done 
Physiological measurements on her clients that those women that allow themselves to get the most fully 
Upset as a consequence of the reliving get better faster and stay better longer 
the Clinical Evidence is absolutely 
Clear when you take someone to therapy you're basically doing two [things] to them well 3 you allow them to confess 
What's wrong with them because it's really useful to actually say what [it] is. That's bothering you makes it clear and distinct 
You help the person get their story straight 
Because you have to have your story straight, [right]? 
You have to know where you're coming [from] and you have to know where you're going because otherwise. There's no structure for your life 
Then the third thing is 
If your path from point a to b 
Is being blocked by something that you're afraid of you better learn [to] confront it because if you don't 
It will grow and expand until it turns into the kind of dragon that occupies your whole house 
This is another representation of the story that's a simple story. I think it's one that's really most applicable to children that 
there are aspects of it that are most applicable to children sexual desire one obviously isn't it's a map of 
Motivation it basically says this and it's easy to understand if you think go to a movie doesn't [matter] what country? 
It's made there's certain things that always happen right like two broad classes of fiction adventure and romance 
What's an adventure to go to new lands and discover something new and become transformed as a consequence? 
What's a romance to meet another person? 
[who's] certainly as complicated as anything you could meet on an adventure [and] 
Again to be transformed as a consequence of the contact to fundamental plots. Why? 
Why are their fundamental plots and why can we understand them without them being explained to us? What's because fundamentally? 
we're all very very similar we have a 
Finite set of basic needs so for example hot people would rather be cool 
thirsty people would rather have water hungry people would rather eat and 
these motivations color what we conceive of as our ultimate destiny so in the old testament for example an 
Agrarian Community often Hungry Paradise was construed as the land of milk and honey 
Well, why well milk is high in fat, [and] honey is high in glucose, and if you're hungry really hungry 
There's nothing you want more than fat and sugar 
Affiliative desire we like to be around other people sexual desire a fundamental sub element of a romantic plot these underlying 
motivational systems of ours set us up 
Bounded worlds Within which we live so for example if you fall in love with someone and you construe [your] destiny as being with them 
any 
Indication that they're pleased with you is going to produce a rush of positive emotion 
Why because our emotional systems are set up so [that] any sign that we're moving towards our goal is 
Responded to with a rush of positive emotion and conversely a frown from the person that you love 
especially in the initial ages of our initial stages of a romance is 
[at] with a flood of negative effect why 
Because anything that stops us on the path [that] we've chosen 
Produces negative emotion that's how we're set up and our emotional systems are actually quite straight forward 
[we] pause it a goal the thing about people is that we can pause it virtually anything as a goal 
That's one of the things that distinguishes us from animals so we can all be thrilled to death when our favorite soccer team 
Scores a goal because we participate in what they're doing [the] same way 
We participate in watching a protagonist [on] [a] movie or in a book we can feel it. We embody it 
We even know now that the neural systems that I utilize to watch a movie 
Involve the same neural systems that the actor is utilizing acting out the part so when you say you understand someone else 
What you mean is your body is set to do exactly the same thing their body is and your emotional systems are locked on 
Exactly the same way there's our so when they experience something, and you're watching it you experience an echo of it 
And that's what understanding means 
And it turns out as well that [those] neural systems that allow us to 
embody someone else and to imitate them are 
right underneath the structures that we've 
Evolved to [use] for language and what that indicates is that mostly what we use language for is to tell stories to 
Tell stories about the way that people act so that we can derive 
Information not about what the [world's] made of because we don't really care about that some fundamental way, but instead 
How should we act? That's the fundamental question how should we act now if you go see a movie about a thug 
the message there is 
Given that the thug generally comes to not-So-good end 
Don't act like a thug right interesting though it might be compelling as a lifestyle at least sufficiently compelling 
So you'll watch it. It's not a good long-term strategy 
What is a good long-term strategy? 
You know we've been collecting stories as people for we don't know how long really we don't know [100,000] years 
Maybe there's been creatures like us indistinguishable from us for a hundred thousand years [and] we know that 
Societies that appear to be more or less as archaic as those old societies tell us stories 
Have rituals have mythology we have ancient written stories at the anu [Mulisch]. Which is a sumerian story the oldest written story. We have 
[4000] Years old based on A 
Oral tradition that's probably 20,000 years older than that we've been collecting stories for a long long time 
What do they mean what are they good for? 
Well imagine this you know you tell a story to your husband or your wife. Hey 
but something interesting that you saw right well then imagine that you could collect a thousand of 
the most interesting stories 
And then imagine that you were some kind of literary genius like like Shakespeare 
And you could take those thousand interesting stories and boil them down to a hundred 
Really interesting stories and then imagine that you had ten thousand years to gather up those hundred most 
Interesting stories and average them and you could come out with one 
Perfect story the best story the most interesting story that you could possibly tell well 
That's what a myth is it's the most interesting story 
You can possibly tell and just as this little story that I [just] told you how to underlying 
Mythological structure virtually every story, you'll ever see has such a structure 
that's why it's compelling to you and when you meet someone who's 
Charismatic or who holds your attention [or] who you're interested in the probability that they're acting out a mythological 
Fragment is very very high and that's why it is [that] your attention is captivated by them 
What's the world like from this perspective? 
Well look you know you're all sitting in this room 
You think if I took you out of here? How would you describe it? 
Well you'd say it was full of chairs. There was a table 
Lights, well, why would you pick that level of resolution any like why wouldn't you say well? You know the average ceiling tile had about? 
15,000 dots on it doesn't seem like a relevant data point right you say the same thing about the rug 
there's no nothing stopping you from counting the number of stains or the number of red Spots or the way the light [plays] off your 
partner's shirt or [the] shine on your shoes and if you are an artist say 
I'm trying to make a representation of this room. You'd concentrate on aspects of it 
We're completely different from those that you're concentrating on now you talk about chairs TV cameras cabinets tables 
They're functional they're objects right. They're tools. They're tools. They're things you can use 
Normally when you're going from point a to point B 
You divide up the world into things you can [use] those are things you see your perceptual systems do this things you can use 
and 
things that might get in the way and as you move from 
motivated world to motivated world the little stories that you inhabit you chop the world up in different pieces, so 
[a] piano for a concert pianist is different as a different phenomena than a piano for someone who has no musical education 
But you're always parsing up the world in terms of what it's good for 
How it can serve your purposes and you even see it that way? 
now the question is 
The complicated question isn't so much. How do you parse up the world into things that are useful to you like chairs? 
The complicated question is what do you do? 
when something that you don't expect happens so imagine you've had a 15 year long marriage and 
you find 
lipstick on your husband's collar not once but three times and then you think well, I 
Thought I had a map right. I thought we were both in the [same] game 
I thought we were both going from point a to the same point b. I thought we had established a shared 
Structure of interpretation, but I find that there's some aspect of his apparent behavior 
It's completely outside my scope of interpretation. What do you do? Well? You can [choose] to ignore that right? It's easy to do that 
Why would you not why would you ignore it because if you don't ignore it you have to think 
He's not who I thought he was and that's really not a good thing to think because people are really really 
Really? 
Complicated and if they're not who you think they are you have no idea who they might [be] and you also might think well? 
Maybe I'm not who I think I am because after all I got sucked into this situation 
I thought I'd pretty much understood the world and turns out that I certainly don't understand 
the office' Gender and there's some indication that I really don't even understand myself because 
Fundamentally, I'm so clueless and then you might [think] well, when did this start this cluelessness 
How long have I [been] blind well? Do you really want to that question well not generally right? 
It's easy to keep the dragon in the closet. Which is where it tends to live 
What happens when you encounter something you don't expect? 
For a long time psychologists thought that people learned fear right so your typical 
Person your typical lab rat was a calm and creature 
Now it's a funny thing and because if you take a lab rat out of his home cage 
and 
He put him in a new cage 
where you want to teach him say to be afraid of something to be afraid of a light paired with a shock which is a 
Typical psychological experiment the funny thing about the rat is [you've] got to let him calm down before he's normal 
Well except that you might think that the not 
Comrade is also the normal route right you take the route out of this cage 
And you put him in the new cage, and what does he do? He goes like this? Why well? 
He's a rat right someone might eat him so he's a bit nervous about being in this new situation rats 
Do not like being in new situations. They don't like bright light if you put them in a new situation. That's brightly lit 
They go right over to the corner because they think maybe cats won't find them 
Rats are so afraid of cats that they never even have to meet a cat to be afraid of them 
So you can take a rat that's never seen a cat in his life 
And if you let him smell some cat odor or show him a cat he'll well 
I'll tell you if you show a rat a cat somewhere. He doesn't expect it 
he will run back to his burrow and scream for 
24 hours 
Now you imagine how scared you'd have to be to scream for 24 hours especially given rattle he lives about a year 
So that would be for you like screaming 
I'll be like screaming for [3] months, right? 
So the rat runs back to his burrow 
And he screams at every other rat who hears him scream freezes and they all stay like that 
for 24 hours until they sort of calm down and 
Then the first thing they do is they go back to the place where they saw [the] cat and they start to map it out 
So they do these things called Corner Runs 
Which is so the rat wants to go back to this territory knows the territory might be a place [where] he gets food? 
Is the cat still there? 
Well you might think [stay] in the burrell right, but then maybe you don't [get] something to eat 
so the [rad] goes back to the place where the cat was 
carefully, and 
Then he hunches down and he runs over part of it 
and if nothing kills [him] then he goes back and does the same thing with a little more of the territory until 
Finally the rats have run all over the territory again, then they go back to 
Eating making love paying attention to their families because mats are quite social [despite] the fact that they're rats 
The rats Smart enough to go back to the scene of the crime so to speak right it's not going to let the dragon that 
might be there grow the rat knows that if something is terrifying it should be investigated [not] run away from 
The question is what do you encounter when you encounter something you don't expect and so you say well? 
You've got your spouse mapped out right, but then they do something 
You don't expect which hopefully happens fairly regularly right because otherwise you get bored with them. They do something 
You don't expect you think Aha, who is that person precisely and what that means is [that] what? 
What that means is that when you encounter something unexpected you actually can't see? What's there? 
Why because [it's] too complicated [you] might have to spend a month talking [to] your spouse? 
To figure out just exactly why they have that particular 
Peculiar opinion you have to explore and dig to find out how they map the world if you encounter something 
unexpected the first thing you see is not the world the first thing you see is just a sense of discomfort and 
Fear combined with some latent curiosity that the world is not the way you thought it was 
Now how do you find out? 
What the world is actually like? 
We have to investigate it you have to investigate it means you have to 
Take a risk you have to move forward the same way that people [do] in psychotherapy. You [have] to find the thing that you're 
Bordering on avoiding and go in and map it now. It's a curious thing you know 
Common anxiety disorders Agra Phobia Agra phobia is a generalized anxiety 
Disorder and people who suffer severely from agra Foam you often get to the point where because of their panics 
Their housebound they can't go outside their room or their house now 
They'd run away [from] the room or their house, too if they could but there's nowhere to run. So they're pretty much stuck being somewhere 
so 
An [Agra] [Fort] comes in for therapy, [I] think [well], what do you do with them? 
And you say well, then agra for big says I can't go on elevators, and you say okay? Well, let's go try 
And you say alright well 
Relax let's teach the person [to] breathe which really doesn't help that much 
But it makes them feel better you can do this without teaching them to relax 
It doesn't matter a bit, but it does help them feel better 
Say, okay, well there's the elevator how close can you get to the elevator? 
Say well, I you know I can't really get more than like 
220 feet that's [Maxim]. I said okay. Let's go up to 20 feet there and 
Let me do that, and then you let them stand there and stand there and stand there and stand there and stand there [Soonerlater] 
They get bored of [being] 20 feet from the elevator 
And then you say well look you know let's could you go 10 [feet] that? No? I couldn't go 10 feet 
That's too close. How about could you go three more feet? Yeah? I think I could do that 
So [they] go three more feet and you let them stand there 
And they find out nothing terrible is happening sooner or later, and then they go another three feet 
And then they go another three feet, and then they're they're like confronting the elevator, and then they're inside the elevator 
But they're going like this so they don't want to look at the elevator, right? 
So you say well you got a look at the elevator. You look at the numbers. [you] can look at the buttons 
So [they] do that, then you think well could we go up a floor no. We couldn't go up a floor okay? 
Well, I'll tell you what we'll just close the door. I'll put my hand and it'll open again could you do that? 
Yeah, I could do that step by step 
Sooner or later and usually sooner bang. They've gone up a floor right, so then what happens 
They go home and have a fight with your husband. That's been brewing for like 15 years 
Why well it's not because the elevators symbolically related to the fight has nothing to do with it 
It's because what the person learns in 
The combat with the unknown which just happens to be taking the guise of an elevator is that they can confront things that frighten them 
without being destroyed by the confrontation 
And so what you see immediately and this was contrary to an original psychoanalytic prediction 
Is that man you know you take that person out you teach them they can go on the elevator and right off the bat 
They're going to shopping malls there in taxis there back in the subway, and they're standing up for themselves at home 
Generalization why because they didn't learn that the elevator wasn't frightening that isn't what they learned? 
They learned that despite the fact that the elevator was as terrifying as anything. They've ever encountered 
[they] were actually up to the challenge, and now that's a really useful thing to teach someone right because 
if you have an obsessive-compulsive 
Patient I had one who [actually] used to work [with] radiation now. He was [Terra] 
He worked in a some kind of bio lab in montreal people with obsessive-compulsive disorder often 
Very frightened if they'll contaminate someone else so like 
Typical obsessive compulsive obsession would be all go to a shopping market 
I'll touch some fruit from you know some third-world country. I'll get some nasty bacterial disease 
I'll bring it home and I'll give it to my kids 
Well you tell them look you know the chances [of] that are like 
150,000 
When they look at you, only think I don't care if the chances are only 
150,000 what if my kids die and you think well? 
Yeah, that does pose a problem doesn't it because it isn't exactly [clear] from a logical perspective 
Where you should draw the risk line? 
With the obsessive-compulsive you do exactly the same thing you say look yeah, your fear is real 
Don't kidding because lurking at the bottom of their fear is the same fear that everybody else has right same fear 
I might die I might get sick. I might lose the people that I love not only might that happen. It's going to happen 
Why aren't people afraid of that all the time? 
We don't really know 
Obsessive person becomes aware of it. What do you tell them you say do it anyway? 
Do it anyways and they learn quickly that if they don't run away from the thing? 
They're afraid of there's something in them that responds to it. They learn that the fear is not larger than they are 
Now I like Aetna foa's case in particular because you always might wonder with this like what's the limit right? Okay? 
Yeah, that sounds good theory, but what if something really terrible is [happening] to you. Well what's happened Dead new Foa's patients? 
That's up there and with terrible right to be nuts up there with terrible 
right stripped of social dignity 
violated physically that combines two of people most specific fears well, then there's other kinds of 
Confrontation to it. I like the story of [solzhenitsyn] 
I think it's really a good one because there's different kinds of dragons right there's natural dragons like death and 
Disease and then there's social dragons like bureaucracies and tyrannies 
Alexander solzhenitsyn you may or may not know was a prisoner in the soviet Gulag 
Concentration Camp system that by his report at least killed 60 million people between 1919 [and] 1959 right 60 million 
That's ten times as many as hitler killed at least with regards to the genocide 
60 million people solzhenitsyn he had a pretty nasty life 
I mean first of all he's on the russian front which was a nasty place to be 
[Mamie] was captured by the German so they didn't like Russians 
So they put them in separate prisoners of war camp partly because Stalin who is a consummate paranoid wouldn't sign the Geneva 
Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war so the Germans set up extra 
Theo w camps for the Russians and they starve generally so badly that if other [plw] were in the vicinity 
They'd throw food packages over the wire even though they themselves weren't particularly well fed 
So then so the war ends the Russians win it so Solzhenitsyn  goes back to Russia right and what happens? 
He's thinking you know wow this is over. We help defend the Fatherland 
We're going to get if not a hero's welcome at least some welcome but [Stellan] figured no no these 
Russians had been to the west they were contaminated by their exposure to the western economic 
System and as a consequence of that they posed a threat to the integrity of the soviet state 
So he just threw them all [in] concentration camps 
so fine, so 
solzhenitsyn sitting there in this concentration Camp on a coal pile a 
coal pile which contained this kind of clay that [his] 
compatriots would eat because they were so damn hungry that it was better to have the clay in their stomach than nothing at all and 
He thought all right 
What the hell did I do to get here? 
which is really a remarkable thing to think right because like there was the second world War and 
That probably couldn't be pinned directly on him 
And then there is stalin who was you know really one of the world's worst monsters 
And then there's the concentration camp and the POW camp and like a lot of things happen to Solzhenitsyn 
But he said he had [nothing] but time to think in this concentration camp 
And he wasn't really that happy with the way things turned out 
So he made a vow in the camp and the vow was this he said 
He is going [to] go back [over] his whole life whole life right from day one and try to remember 
Every time he ever did something he thought was wrong 
He thought right not someone else, but that that gave his conscience a pang 
And he said well since I don't have anything better to do 
I mean spend like the next 10 years seeing if I can undo all those little knots in my soul that [I] tied and 
The consequence of that was that he wrote a book called [the] gulag archipelago 
Write three volume book [19] hundred pages long he memorized it because there wasn't any [paper-and-pencil] available for him in prison 
And then it circulated in the underground in the soviet [union] for years before it got published in the west published in 1975 
Definitely one of the literary events that brought down the soviet union 
[I] think that's kind of interesting isn't it think this one guy right? It's got numbers tattooed on his arm 
He's as skinny as a rail. He's 3/4 dead. He's been beat to death in 15 different ways 
He decides under completely unreasonable 
Circumstances that he's going to take personal responsibility for the position that he happens [to] find himself in the consequence of that 
25 years later is that 
solzhenitsyn still around 
Soviet Union isn't and you think well that can't be the way the world works now can it but then you think this to like? 
Do we really know how the world works right? We've had a pretty nasty century in the last hundred years [right] 
[we] had the nazis we had mild side tongue. We had the recent tragedies in Africa 
We don't seem to learn anything about genocide someone like solzhenitsyn says well, you know 
Might be your fault 
Why, what are you ignoring? 
Good question can you make peace with your own family it's not so [easy], right? 
It's probably no easier than making Peace between the ISraelis [and] the palestinians 
What do we encounter when we encounter something? We don't understand? 
We all know 
It's not the simple world of objects the simpler world of objects is something we've learned to see the real world [is] way more 
Complicated than what we just see let me give you an example 
When I was in montreal in 1985 my computer crashed 
So what do you do when your computer crashes? Well? We're not when the computer encounters something unexpected it crashes 
It can't do a damn thing about it. You have to fix it, so [I] checked the monitor. It was okay 
I wouldn't go on seemed [alright] 
And I noticed my lamps weren't working so [I] went the fuse box so all the fuses seemed, okay? 
So then I went outside to [go] down to the corner store to get a cigarette 
And I saw that outside all the lights were off the traffic lights were off right the whole City was in darkness 
Then I found out the next day that there was a solar wind 
Big solar flare put out a big cloud of electrons zipped along to Earth at the speed of light 
Put an electrical pulse through the [hydroelectric] grid and quebec crashed my computer 
well, I hadn't thought until that point that the integrity of my computer was dependent on the stability of the 
Sun 
Everything is way more complicated than it looks and when you just look at something you see a very simple representation of what's actually there 
What do you encounter when you encounter something unexpected? 
Well when you first encounter it you don't know 
All you know is that? 
frightens you 
But it makes you curious think dragons right every primates afraid of lizards keeping us 
Chimpanzees don't like snakes if you take a chip, it's never seen a snake you throw it show it a snake 
It will hit the roof of its cage. Then it will look at the snake 
Why would a dragon hoard gold? 
Because [a] dragon represents everything that you're afraid of what's embedded in everything [that] you're afraid of 
Absolutely everything that you need to find run from what you're afraid of run from exactly what you need to find 
One of the oldest dramatic representations. We know of not this specific painting this is St. 
George and the Dragon right dragon lives in the ground 
Chase there by Heroes of Previous generation 
now and then reemerging 
Kills people right these are skulls around its? 
lair 
threatens the integrity of the community like everything unexpected does 
Hero comes out 
Slays the dragon 
Frees the treasure in this case, it's a virginal woman 
Dragon's hoard gold because the thing you most need is always to be found [where] you least want to look 
I'm going to close this with another dream 
this [is] [a] dream my 
Five-Year-Old nephew had now he got to get the context of this dream right here after this dream parents were divorced 
So there were dragons in the house 
He was about four at this time is running around the house with this little plastic 
[night] helmet on and a sort is zipping around killing things with it 
Doing this all the time and even when he went to sleep at night 
[he'd] put the the 
Sword by his 
Pillow and the night Helmet on his pillow now every night or every second night or every third night for six months 
He'd been waking up screaming now. Why well he was about to go to Kindergarten, right? 
So that's that's a real threshold for kid way from maternal dependence fundamentally into the real world. That's 
That's a new thing, but also there was upset in his house 
So I was there one night when he woke up screaming next morning 
I said well, did you dream anything and so he launched into this story? He said? 
Dwarf he was in this field and these little creatures like dwarfs. [we're] coming up to him and they didn't have any arms 
They just had legs and they were 
It had big beaks and they were covered with hair and grease and on top of their head was a cross shaved into this 
Hair and there's lots and [lots] of these dwarfs and they were jumping on him with their beaks biting him we all looked to them 
Thought well, it's no wonder you're waking up [screaming], right? 
I mean, you know that doesn't sound so good and then he said well, wait. There's more right back in the distance 
There's a dragon and the dragon is puffing out 
Fire and smoke and every time he pops out fire and smoke it turns into these [dwarfs] 
Big problem right just like the problem of the hydra in Greek mythology [cut] off one head 
Seven more appear right so what I'm going to do about these [dwarfs] kill one big deal ten more coming I? 
Said what can you do about that? 
now in a legal trial that would have been an inadmissible question right that's called leading the whip because what I told him was 
Despite the horror of this situation 
You maybe could do something about it honey said ha [I] take my sword I get my dad. That's a good idea right dad 
[there's] the real dad and then there's the tradition dad right you might as well 
Have your father by your side if you're going to go into battle 
[I'd] take my sword I get my dad I go to where the dragon was I 
Jump up on his head. I poked both of his eyes out with this sword 
I'd go down his throat to the place where the fire comes out 
[I] cut a piece of that box out and I'd use it as a shield and I thought wow that's unbelievable 
[unbelievable] that he could do that's perfect right there's no sense going after the dwArfs because 
Thousands of them you might as well go after the dragon 
What happens if you go after the dragon you get a piece [of] it right [a] piece of its center? 
Nature [a] piece [that] can defend you against anything 
Including other dragons, so what if this was the case [thankful]? 
Evolutionarily speaking or religiously speaking. What if we were adapted to the world now? 
What if it's not the simple place of Dead? 
Objects that we think it is. What if it's something a lot more alive [a] lot more like a story 
What if the story is something like this? 
You have absolutely everything you need 
But you have to use all of it 
If you run away from any of it and in particular the parts of it that [frighten] you which you know there's the endless reasons 
To run away from if you run away from any of it 
You don't get that piece of the dragon if you miss even one piece. There's a chink in your armor 
There's a place where you're vulnerable [if] you make even one mistake you lessen yourself if you lessen yourself 
You're going to run away more not only that when someone wants to lean on you 
They're not going to be able to lean on you because you'll just fall over 
What if it was the case that we were adapted to the world? 
Really adapted to it. So that if we made full use of all the talents we had we'd be okay 
What if it was the case [that] if we set out? 
Consciously to never run away from something we know we shouldn't run [away] from that everything would be all right 
You can think whatever you want to think but this is what I think I think it's bloody amazing 
That that little kids book that I read you at the beginning of this lecture 
Had all that information in it, and so you might ask yourself when you leave 
If that information isn't true. How the hell did it get there? 
That's it 
Support, Ontario's public television Donate at t. V-- org 
Slaying the Dragon Within us, Jordan B Peterson
There is no such thing as a dragon, Jack Kent

